---
layout: page
title: Stegosaurus
date: 2018-03-25 18:56:00 Z
position: 1
Order: Ornithischia
Family: Stegosauridae
Subfamily: Stegosaurinae
Genus: Stegosaurus
---

Stegosaurus, genus of plant-eating ornithischian (bird-hipped) dinosaurs known for the large triangular plates along the crest of the back. Stegosaurus’s armor accounts for its name, which is derived from the Greek words stego, 'cover,' and sauros, 'lizard.' These plates, as well as a number of spikes on the tail, render Stegosaurus one of the most recognizable of all dinosaurs. It lived on low plains in the interior of North America, Europe, Africa, and Asia during the late Jurassic Period, about 150 million years ago. 

The plates along Stegosaurus’s spine served both as protection and as a means of regulating body heat. A few well-preserved skeletons demonstrate that the plates were arranged in an alternating row along the crest of the back. Scientists believe that the primary function of the plates was to absorb and give off heat. Fossil evidence indicating that the plates had a rich supply of blood vessels supports this theory. Tests of models in wind tunnels have shown that the plates also could have aided in the removal of body heat by channeling wind currents across the plates’ surfaces. This process may have regulated the animal’s body temperature. The number and size of the plates suggest that Stegosaurus either lived in hot, tropical environments (similar to present-day India) or often had to shed large quantities of heat generated by the fermentation of food in its digestive system. While the animal had a low metabolic rate, it nevertheless appears to have given off high levels of body heat. Various large animals in existence today, including elephants, have slow digestive systems and give off large amounts of body heat. 

Pairs of spikes projected sideways from the tail. They were obviously used for defense. As a further defense, an “apron” of small bones embedded in the skin protected the throat. 

Stegosaurus had a beak and small, weak teeth. These features indicate that it chewed poorly. Its small teeth could not aid in digestion, so the animal ate soft food that fermented slowly within its massive body.

Stegosaurus was about 4.5 m (15 ft) long and weighed from 3.5 metric tons to 6.5 metric tons. Its head was extremely small in proportion to its body size. The tiny size of its jaws relative to its large body implies a low feeding rate. Minimal food requirements and the ability to store fat enabled the animal to survive lean, dry seasons, when it may have presented an attractive source of nourishment to meat-eating dinosaurs. 

Stegosaurus resembled a giant porcupine, with a high back and nimble forelimbs with which it could maneuver to strike its tail spikes into oncoming attackers. This rugged animal was adapted to living on food of poor quality that may have been available only seasonally and in harsh environments. Stegosaurus lived in close association with the sauropods, such as Apatosaurus and Diplodocus, of the late Jurassic Period. 