---
layout: page
title: Tyrannosaurus
date: 2018-03-25 17:28:00 Z
position: 3
Order: Saurischia
Family: Tyrannosauridae
Subfamily: Tyrannosaurinae
Tribe: Tyrannosaurini
Genus: Tyrannosaurus
---

Tyrannosaurus, the name of a genus (group) of large, two-legged, meat-eating dinosaurs that lived in the late Cretaceous Period, about 65 million years ago. The name Tyrannosaurus is derived from the Greek words tyrannos, “tyrant,” and sauros, “lizard.” Instantly recognizable by their size, upright posture, serrated (jagged) teeth, and small, two-fingered forelimbs, Tyrannosaurus were some of the largest meat-eating land animals that ever existed.

Scientists know more about Tyrannosaurus than they do about any other predatory dinosaur. They have found dozens of skeletons of these giant saurischians (“lizard-hipped” dinosaurs), mainly throughout the western United States and Canada. Tyrannosaurus may also have lived in Mongolia. A particularly large and complete skeleton named Sue is on display at the Field Museum in Chicago. Another fossilized Tyrannosaurus, discovered in Montana, was so well preserved that blood vessels and other soft tissue remained within its thighbone. Researchers reported in 2007 that they had isolated protein fragments from the soft tissue and had found amino acid sequences similar to those in modern chickens.

Tyrannosaurus are members of the family Tyrannosauridae, in the suborder Theropoda. Although scientists disagree about the number of species in the genus Tyrannosaurus, some scientists recognize four species, of which Tyrannosaurus rex is the best known. Other researchers place the Asian species found in Mongolia in the separate genus Tarbosaurus. Some experts consider the small tyrannosaurid genus Nanotyrannus to be a juvenile Tyrannosaurus rex.

The earliest ancestors of tyrannosaurids appear to have been small, lightly built meat-eating dinosaurs called coelurosaurs that lived during the late Jurassic and early Cretaceous periods. Tyrannosaurids are not closely related to other large meat-eating dinosaurs such as Allosaurus or Giganotosaurus. Fossils thought to be the ancestors of tyrannosaurids have been found in Asia and in Europe. One of these small dinosaurs discovered in northeastern China was named Dilong. It was about 1.6 m (5 ft) long. Some of its remains were preserved with what appear to be featherlike structures on parts of its body.

Tyrannosaurus was among the largest flesh-eating terrestrial animals, exceeded in size only by Giganotosaurus and Carcharodontosaurus. Mapusaurus and Spinosaurus may also have been larger than Tyrannosaurus. Tyrannosaurus reached 12.5 m (41 ft) in length and 5 m (16 ft) in height, and weighed more than 5 metric tons. The skull of a Tyrannosaurus was large and flexible but also had fused bones to help brace its extremely powerful bite. Its bone-crushing bite was probably more powerful than that of any other flesh-eating dinosaur. The bridge of the nose contained wartlike knobs and pits.

The animals had a broad field of vision. However, some scientists think Tyrannosaurus may have been able to focus its eyes directly to the front, permitting a degree of binocular vision and depth perception. One recent study even suggested that their large eyes could have been more acute than those of eagles or hawks. The brain of Tyrannosaurus was proportionately slightly larger in size than that of a modern crocodile. Although there were well developed areas for smell and sight, it is not certain that such a brain would have allowed Tyrannosaurus to see as well as modern predatory birds.

Tyrannosaurus had short arms with few nerves running through them. This limited nerve development suggests that the arm movements must have been unwieldy and clumsy. The barrel-shaped chest of these dinosaurs indicates that the lungs were very large. A latticework of bones protected the stomach and other internal organs. The legs were long and slender.

Tyrannosaurus probably preferred open terrain, such as broad game trails and open forests, where it could move its large body and see unimpeded by brush. Scientists estimate that Tyrannosaurus could walk rapidly. Some researchers think they may have been able to run at speeds up to 40 km/h (25 mph) when chasing prey. Other researchers think they likely moved at a slower pace to avoid falls or injury. Tyrannosaurus also could lie in ambush upon a strong pelvic extension, with chin on the ground, watching for prey with their high-placed eyes. 

Scientists debate whether Tyrannosaurus were warm-blooded like modern mammals. Evidence suggests that the creatures had a uniform body temperature, which would require a metabolic rate higher than that of other reptiles. Some scientists have even suggested that very young Tyrannosaurus had feathers, not for flying but for insulation. The discovery of feather-like structures on Dilong, a possible ancestor, could support this idea. Preserved skin found on fossils of some adult tyrannosaurids, however, had a bare, beaded appearance.

A higher body temperature would require Tyrannosaurus to eat more often than other reptiles. The stomach of the dinosaur could hold more than half a metric ton of flesh, which would be consumed every few weeks. Scientists have found a 2-liter (2.1-qt) lump of fossilized dung that contains direct evidence of the prey of Tyrannosaurus: partly digested bone fragments of young plant-eating dinosaurs. Further evidence of their diet includes a Triceratops pelvis that exhibits deep punctures and grooves made by Tyrannosaurus teeth. Like most active carnivores, Tyrannosaurus probably also fed on the decaying bodies of dinosaurs killed by starvation and floods. Tooth marks on some Tyrannosaurus skulls indicate that the animals fought with one another by biting on the face. The discovery of groups of skeletons of different sizes and ages buried together suggests to some researchers that tyrannosaurids may have lived or hunted in family groups.

Tyrannosaurus almost certainly laid eggs, although no definite nests or eggs have been identified. Some researchers think that growth rings in fossil bone tissue of Tyrannosaurus and its close tyrannosaurid relatives indicate that babies grew rapidly after hatching and underwent a major growth spurt in their teenage years between ages 14 and 18. Their growth slowed once they became full adults around age 18. A normal lifespan was apparently under 30 years. Recent studies of different age groups suggest to some scientists that tyrannosaurids had a mortality pattern similar to large mammals and birds. However, it would appear that tyrannosaurids had much higher birth rates (number of eggs per clutch) and higher death rates than large mammals and birds, which often live longer than 30 years. Many baby tyrannosaurids did not survive to the age of 2, but individuals that did survive usually lived to age 13. The death-rate rose sharply during the competitive teen years as the animals grew to sexual maturity, with only a small number of adult tyrannosaurids surviving beyond their early 20s. Fossils of young adult tyrannosaurids are the most common. Old giants such as Sue, who reached the age of 28, are rare.